Michael Shannon: Hello there and welcome back everybody to day to session two of the CIS SP boot camp with Michael and David it's great to have everybody back well, not everybody yet, but eventually.
Michael Shannon: People are kind of virtually filing in the back door so we'll give them a few seconds, but welcome to everybody who's here, looking at some of the chat areas david's been very busy thanks man for doing all that.
Michael Shannon: So Victor you watch the.
Michael Shannon: CIS SP March.
Michael Shannon: boot camp session one uh.
Michael Shannon: Well, you can wait for.
Michael Shannon: This boot camp session one and watch it, it is pretty much the same.
Michael Shannon: None of the content has been changed.
Michael Shannon: But you know.
Michael Shannon: It should be pretty much similar.
Michael Shannon: I can't think of anything, maybe you know, a couple of anecdotal comments or whatever might be different, but you know you might want to wait or after class today watch the may bootcamp session one.
Michael Shannon: Evelyn can we also have the deck so the study guide.
Michael Shannon: The PDF files, those are, in essence, the deck it's you know, an export into PDF of all of the PowerPoint slides we don't distribute the PowerPoint slides because that's really kind of intellectual property.
Michael Shannon: That we use, you know to.
Michael Shannon: teach the course but that P, the pdfs are pretty much all those slides.
Michael Shannon: And as David is saying our session one recording should be up in Pacific to a little later today.
Michael Shannon: So you know we usually say 24 hours after the courses over and technically speaking it's only been 20 hours, since the course was over right so usually later on in day two you'll have those available to you all right.
Michael Shannon: alrighty let's go ahead today we've got a lot to cover we have 162 slides i'm going to go pretty quickly over this first section, which is really asset classification.
Michael Shannon: And some of these other topics and get quickly to risk management so we've got risk management, which I want to spend some time on.
Michael Shannon: there's also.
Michael Shannon: Practical cryptography we're going to cover today when I first took the CIS SP back in 2002 and I took it again, you know 2015.
Michael Shannon: There was actually a cryptography domain, so you know of the domains of the common body of knowledge and then they call it.
Michael Shannon: For years, there was a dedicated cryptography domain, they no longer have that however cryptography practical of crop cryptography is really interleaved.
Michael Shannon: through most of the other domains right, so we want to make sure that i've got a pretty big section on practical cryptography that we want to cover Okay, and then identity management.
Michael Shannon: we're going to wrap up with today, so an important day, but these early these early slides i'm going to go pretty quickly through these.
Michael Shannon: you're going to do a gap analysis right but uh just so make sure if there's anything in this asset classification asset assessment that.
Michael Shannon: You know you make sure you review that before the exam and what's The bottom line here, well, the bottom line is before we get to the risk management and risk assessment.
Michael Shannon: You have to know what you have right having an inventory of your physical and logical assets, knowing the things you're going to protect.
Michael Shannon: With your controls is kind of part of the first order of business, yesterday we looked at, you know kind of global topics right ending up with like policies.
Michael Shannon: So we have to know, we have the first thing here we just remind ourselves that there are three main states of data data at rest.
Michael Shannon: or data in storage and we have different types of storage, we have data in transit, and we have different types of transit right we have wired transit on ethernet we have fiber.
Michael Shannon: We have wireless different several different types of wireless transmission so data in motion data in use volatile data and, as I mentioned yesterday that's where we have the least maturity.
Michael Shannon: As far as protection goes often we opt to not protect the data in us because of the overhead.
Michael Shannon: But it's very common for content delivery networks like akamai or cloud flair or aws cloud front to distribute the copies of their content, not to these edge locations in raid arrays but in reddest clusters in memory storage memory chips clusters of memory chips.
Michael Shannon: And therefore often there is no encryption of that data okay it's just cached content, but if we do decide to encrypt data.
Michael Shannon: In use we'll talk about a couple of options in the cryptography section so obviously knowing the different States of data we protect data addressed.
Michael Shannon: Right we're obviously going to store that data in zones right and the zone based methodology and those zones that have our raid arrays are our servers or a storage area networking or directly attached storage.
Michael Shannon: We obviously have zone interface points of service firewalls between those zones so we're controlling the access to that data right with kind of perimeter offense perimeter defenses layer three for firewalls.
Michael Shannon: intrusion prevention systems.
Michael Shannon: database activity, monitoring and anti virus, we have our Defense in depth controls for access to that data.
Michael Shannon: We want to make sure we have strict multifactor authentication separation of duties Okay, maybe do a low operator, maybe different.
Michael Shannon: groups or users to do the backups in the snapshots and different groups to do the restoration recovery, we can have full disk encryption self encrypting drives data address could be keys and certificates that can be stored in hardware security modules.
Michael Shannon: Data in motion.
Michael Shannon: We can just dedicate align a leased line it could it be tapped yeah, but we can dedicate fiber we can do encapsulation techniques or we can use cryptographic methods, it will talk about later transport layer security usually 1.2 and 1.3 going forward IP SEC vpn site remote access.
Michael Shannon: I version two traditionally or newer relatively newer ike i'm sorry I conversion one.
Michael Shannon: Internet key exchange version one traditionally, which is still being used usually more often, like in branch offices and sites with older equipment and there's like version two which supports sweet the cryptography we'll talk about that.
Michael Shannon: Data in motion.
Michael Shannon: A lot of organizations now we're transitioning away from wpa two which we've used for 15 years or so.
Michael Shannon: To wpa three that has management frame protection native or.
Michael Shannon: Protected management frames you'll see both of those MSP and HP EMF.
Michael Shannon: it's very common to use to protect data in motion and 802 dot one X ieee P neck port based access control with eXtensible authentication protocols dot one X works over a wireless network dot 11 dot one X works over a wired network.
Michael Shannon: very popular it's a big part of google's zero trust initiative.
Michael Shannon: And, along with it at the enterprise level various modes of eXtensible authentication protocol, we need to be familiar with a PT Ls AAP TT Ls protected AAP peep popular with Microsoft AAP fast popular with Cisco.
Michael Shannon: And then another emerging.
Michael Shannon: mechanism and that's really.
Michael Shannon: that's a typo.
Michael Shannon: So make sure that i'll make sure I fixed that.
Michael Shannon: i'll make a new PDF for you, because that's not a.
Michael Shannon: that's energy dot one at.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: And that's a MAC SEC so basically getting the same security services that we get from IP SEC at layer to media access control security, and you know encryption for confidentiality.
Michael Shannon: And you can deploy a MAC SEC, without having to have a separate H MAC.
Michael Shannon: Because you can deploy MAC SEC is an ad we'll talk more about that that's very popular solution in fact.
Michael Shannon: More and more cloud providers that are offering these direct connections.
Michael Shannon: aws direct connect express route Google interconnect these direct connections to cloud partners aren't including Max SEC to increase your level of competence that the data is protected, because it's the frames are being encrypted.
Michael Shannon: So, again we're talking about the importance of knowing what you have right if you've ever had to.
Michael Shannon: Do let's say an elaborate.
Michael Shannon: home insurance policy or renters policy or maybe you've got a policy with your insurance company, and you have things you want to ensure, in your home.
Michael Shannon: Often, what you have to do is go through, and like make an inventory of all of your valuables sometimes you take pictures, or you take video of all of your valuables and you provide that to the insurance company who's ensuring your collectibles your valuables in your home for the policy.
Michael Shannon: same concept before you can lower risk and have a high degree of insurance, that you can protect your assets, you have to know what they are.
Michael Shannon: You have to have some type of value on them either qualitatively, you know this is this is mission critical, and this is, you know important or quantitatively, preferably with real numbers.
Michael Shannon: prioritisation.
Michael Shannon: Classification labeling and the classification may be necessary, because the access control model mandates that you have sensitivity levels classification levels, whether you're in the public sector, the private sector.
Michael Shannon: You may have a configuration management database it's going to store all this information.
Michael Shannon: Hopefully, whatever schema you use to tag and label your physical and logical assets on premises that's a schema that you can also kind of translate or migrate to the cloud.
Michael Shannon: it's always better if you're going to use the cloud.
Michael Shannon: And if you're going to use the cloud for single sign on that you try to maintain let's say your usernames schema.
Michael Shannon: Right in your directory if you can maintain that if you can maintain your key value pairs schema for your labeling and handling.
Michael Shannon: It makes your hybrid cloud scenario, but a much smoother transition, otherwise you have to do, additional mapping, maybe you have to have middle tier services that you know, are going to do proxies.
Michael Shannon: I mentioned service now as a potential see imdb but there's no specific that those are just there for you to go and research on your own, but this is a critical part of the change control changing configuration management practices.
Michael Shannon: I I till but I till forbid call these practices, a critical role and it service management it sm whether you use an ideal for or co but five or something else.
Michael Shannon: It just comes down to knowing what you have and having it stored and not just storing, but some type of inventory system that is dynamic and automated so you can on a.
Michael Shannon: continual basis know the posture.
Michael Shannon: As far as updates and upgrades and service packs.
Michael Shannon: Next Generation software that's very important as well.
Michael Shannon: extremely important in a zero trust environment.
Michael Shannon: Because in zero trust it's not just knowing what you have, as far as the objects are your assets are concerned it's knowing at any given time, the posture.
Michael Shannon: The state of those assets.
Michael Shannon: So this database.
Michael Shannon: is critical to to a wide variety of services patch management incident management problem management release and deployment all of these different IT services.
Michael Shannon: It also is going to contribute to root cause analysis problem resolution it'll be using forensic investigations incident response teams will will use this it'll use for be used for formulating strategy capacity management availability management budgetary forecasting.
Michael Shannon: So this database, whether it's something that's on premises, maybe a no sequel database, or some software as a service solution is critical to knowing what you have, and knowing this state of what you have.
Michael Shannon: In your labeling.
Michael Shannon: you're tagging your labeling has to have a consistent schema and it has to be something that can be useful to generate meaningful data metrics for a wide variety of services.
Michael Shannon: And again, like I said it may be based on.
Michael Shannon: sensitivity levels in a MAC model.
Michael Shannon: Like a bell up a doula model.
Michael Shannon: And there's different things that can you know dictate a classification level.
Michael Shannon: You know, often is based on some architecture your subjects in your objects are being controlled by a mandatory access control model very common.
Michael Shannon: But if you aren't using that model, other ways you'll classify it as basically value qualitatively and quantitatively the age right things assets.
Michael Shannon: From a financial standpoint, you will deprecate right from an accountancy standpoint, the value of assets on maybe on an annual basis, goes down over you useful life, the utility and I mentioned the example yesterday.
Michael Shannon: You know, in a couple of months i'm going to have to redo my certified cloud security professional.
Michael Shannon: Is C squared certification.
Michael Shannon: Because I just did it last summer, but they're changing the exam so all of that most of that content or some of that content it's useful life.
Michael Shannon: will be deprecating as I replace it with the new course.
Michael Shannon: And then it can be based on personally identifiable information or health information, whoever that particular individual is in the organization so some type of unified schema and often today that always we do gravitate towards a document key value.
Michael Shannon: type.
Michael Shannon: Does that mean we don't use relational database systems anymore absolutely not still quite widely deployed, but for a new implementation, you might want to gravitate towards a key value pair no sequel kind of approach.
Michael Shannon: If you looked at the Google beyond corp which I recommended to you.
Michael Shannon: When you go check it out, which is there zero trust initiative.
Michael Shannon: They place a high value on their inventory system their automated inventory system that is tightly coupled with their directory service HR and other services.
Michael Shannon: to know exactly what they have in the state of those assets, very important to them, because if you're taking an if you take an attribute based access control model.
Michael Shannon: Yes, you have variables of the subjects, but the entities that are accessing the assets, those are variables, who, what, when why where how but there's also variables of the objects their state their posture.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: And that ties in a heavily that system and inventory system is being used.
Michael Shannon: By their 802 dot one X environment to do remediation network access control.
Michael Shannon: That has change of authorization built into it.
Michael Shannon: So that if somebody tries to access the network and the posture of their device or the posture of whatever they're trying to access is that up to date.
Michael Shannon: Then they're going to be moved or quarantined maybe get a captive portal, or something to remediate and then change of authorization will say okay now, you can have access to the directory service or now, you can have access to the corporate land or the wireless network or whatever.
Michael Shannon: A key aspect of.
Michael Shannon: Port based network access control.
Michael Shannon: So you may have a digital asset manager that's a growing enterprise role, especially as we use cloud.
Michael Shannon: cloud providers solutions.
Michael Shannon: It used to be, I would say.
Michael Shannon: When those courses being developed.
Michael Shannon: In the objectives they specifically mentioned justin time.
Michael Shannon: Asset inventory.
Michael Shannon: And it's the definitions on this slide the second bullet point.
Michael Shannon: just in time is an inventory strategy us to increase efficiency and decrease waste by acquiring goods only as needed.
Michael Shannon: and
Michael Shannon: That just in time philosophy we're kind of suffering some of the consequences of that, as we have the supply chain disruptions suddenly.
Michael Shannon: The acquiring of the goods right the acquiring of the goods as it's not as smooth and easy as it was two and a half years ago.
Michael Shannon: So that may affect you know inventory and from a security standpoint, you know we're not really talking about you know, a retail grocery store we're talking about components.
Michael Shannon: modular components that the this the hot spares the additional equipment that we need from a security standpoint.
Michael Shannon: yeah Colin exactly now I allude to it, but by under no circumstances on this exam will that be like a scenario question.
Michael Shannon: But you know.
Michael Shannon: kind of theoretically absolutely.
Michael Shannon: So you need to whatever your your fixed asset inventory.
Michael Shannon: You have to realize that, obviously, this may be so massive that you have to scope this out.
Michael Shannon: This needs to be a project or a program you using maybe an agile or P amp D project manager and you're not doing this, not an entire organization right you're you're taking off chunks you're biting off, you know, certain areas certain departments certain floors certain buildings.
Michael Shannon: Certain cloud providers certain accounts okay.
Michael Shannon: And again part of this creating this inventory is going forward trying to rely on automation as much as possible.
Michael Shannon: And again, one of the main goals of this is not only to know what we have but one of the other benefits is will be doing an analysis to find will be called ghost it ghost assets shadow it right in this inventory will discover systems that are running you know Type two hypervisor.
Michael Shannon: and possibly running unlicensed software or pirated content or unauthorized applications on the on all of our devices right, so you know there's plenty there's ghost it.
Michael Shannon: In mobile application management as well right.
Michael Shannon: I said I was going to move quickly to this, but you know, I have a difficult time, moving quickly, but I need to forget that I can't forget that you guys are not.
Michael Shannon: Security plus people you're experienced so we talked about data roles owners steward custodian I guess I left one of them is also data processors that's a roll somebody who just you know does data input or runs batch files okay.
Michael Shannon: The data life cycle is different, if you look at the CIS SP objectives, this is the data life cycle it's a different data life cycle than the cloud security professional.
Michael Shannon: I actually prefer the cloud lifecycle better.
Michael Shannon: This is the one that's presented in the objectives, so this is the life cycle, you really want to be familiar with okay so collection can be data creation data capture we acquire the data we do data entry we receive data okay.
Michael Shannon: Maybe your CRM system is aggregating all of the different logs and alerts and alarms and traps and informs.
Michael Shannon: You may have net flow collectors okay.
Michael Shannon: So they have data collection, which is data creation data capture Okay, unless you.
Michael Shannon: Create or gather the data it can't really go to the next phase and we talked about Article that's specifically the article 25.
Michael Shannon: But in the gdpr it's really critical that in this these early phases that you're only generating creating collecting data that is going to be meaningful.
Michael Shannon: that's the data minimization goal can be mentioned yesterday article 25 of gdpr companies must protect data by design.
Michael Shannon: by default.
Michael Shannon: Protecting data by deployment because you're deploying it into a secure environment is the least optimal.
Michael Shannon: realize that you have different types of data storage.
Michael Shannon: Will just use a cloud, for example, very common so at Amazon web services will just use them for an example, the object storage is will be called blob storage.
Michael Shannon: object storage is not accessed through a file system.
Michael Shannon: it's a flat hierarchy we access these buckets or containers of objects, and this is usually content.
Michael Shannon: This is not stuff it's an object storage is not a highly transactional like you would see in block storage, it supports the database.
Michael Shannon: A lot of random read writes high I OPS type of activity.
Michael Shannon: high performance computing no object storage is there a store objects graphic files pictures audio files video files pdfs.
Michael Shannon: The back end content for whatever your web application your content distribution.
Michael Shannon: that's what object storage is and we access it primarily by two ways one through a URL or two through an API.
Michael Shannon: And a cloud provider the API be sending like an endpoint.
Michael Shannon: it's something that resides at the cloud provider you don't need a public IP address you don't need a gateway is just an endpoint connection the API call that you make to the object storage.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: massively scalable.
Michael Shannon: Lots of metadata so with object storage, you can have version eating.
Michael Shannon: lots of other types of metadata with those objects eXtensible metadata more analytics block storage.
Michael Shannon: Again, is volume storage stored in a hard disk drive or a solid state drive or a raid array of those drives and it's you know zeros and ones and a fixed size volume accessed by some type of file system, maybe, if you if you're using you know, a storage area network type scenario.
Michael Shannon: That control information, maybe IP based or layer two in the frame.
Michael Shannon: If you access it over this storage area network, and you have various file systems that windows and Linux and MAC os use Okay, they have different use cases.
Michael Shannon: So you need to be aware of how your data is being stored stored.
Michael Shannon: there's different types of databases relational database systems and whether, if you migrate let's say your Oracle database up to the cloud.
Michael Shannon: Usually, if you have a really extremely large Oracle database then it's going to involve several different services from the cloud provider you're probably going to get one of those direct connect connections that gives you 10 gig 50 gig and in some cities 100 gig pipe.
Michael Shannon: you'll have some type of storage device like a gateway that you'll install on premises that will do a migration service.
Michael Shannon: and other management services for you.
Michael Shannon: And to get all that data, up to the data warehouse or the data lake.
Michael Shannon: Which is a relational database system.
Michael Shannon: Now do cloud providers have out of band ways to get data to the cloud they do have out of band methods like bell you can go and they'll ship you like a box.
Michael Shannon: That holds like terabytes of data and it's encrypted and then you just ship it back or in some situations like aws has what's called the snowmobile with ocean, send a shipping container out.
Michael Shannon: And you put a bunch of what are called snowballs on that thing and then you ship it back.
Michael Shannon: For databases data storage data warehouse a key value database is no sql.
Michael Shannon: Okay, no sequel document key value style high traffic web Apps E commerce systems gaming Apps.
Michael Shannon: In memory that's mem cached and rattus type of storage.
Michael Shannon: The document database is a key value type then there's other emerging newer types of databases that cloud providers offer.
Michael Shannon: A graph database uses what are called nodes and graph databases excel at representing relationships.
Michael Shannon: So graph databases are being used more and more for things like you know if a country is going to create a you know profile of their citizens.
Michael Shannon: You know they'll use a graph database that will take all information about you and create this you know social profile recommendation engines fraud detection and then of course the ledger.
Michael Shannon: ledger database is going to be involved with blockchain technology.
Michael Shannon: On a blockchain You can write to the blockchain you can read from the blockchain database, but you can't change it.
Michael Shannon: it's immutable.
Michael Shannon: If you have to correct something it's going to be something you write on a subsequent change, but even if you write something or put in something that has a modification to that on a future block there has to be consensus.
Michael Shannon: Some consensus mechanism approval.
Michael Shannon: And it's distributed.
Michael Shannon: So maintenance another phase Okay, this is basically once the data has been collected, where is it stored and maintenance also is going to involve processing, you know where where the raw data becomes information and information becomes knowledge.
Michael Shannon: Moves movement integration data cleansing.
Michael Shannon: augmentation you could even include token ization here.
Michael Shannon: remnants is a term that means if you run some type of software some type of deletion process or cleaning process is something leftover maybe not the data, but is data about the data Meta data or some artifact does it remain.
Michael Shannon: This is a known residual risk.
Michael Shannon: Keeping data until it's no longer needed.
Michael Shannon: that's what data retention is and that's going to be different for each data use case it'll be different if you're you know, subject to some regulations or mandates, you have to keep your corporate tax records for a certain number of years if you're an insurance company, even if a.
Michael Shannon: You have a client of your insurance company they switch to another ensure which happens all the time you slept to maintain that data about that customer for a certain period of time.
Michael Shannon: So the type of organization you're in business sector regulations mandate that's going to dictate your data retention policy.
Michael Shannon: Your archival.
Michael Shannon: And then there is the disposal once that.
Michael Shannon: you've gone past the retention period.
Michael Shannon: Or you don't have to retain the data, this is the disposition the disposal phase phase we're not just talking about you know wiping or deleting zeros and ones.
Michael Shannon: You know there's physical assets, a lot of organizations, a big vulnerability is that they will just take hard drives they'll take components from laptops and phones and they just throw them in the dumpster.
Michael Shannon: that's not that's a dumpster diving that's gold.
Michael Shannon: You know if you can find if you're doing dumpster diving is social engineering and you can find these drives and other things are just tossed.
Michael Shannon: Man that's.
Michael Shannon: that's a that's a that's a huge find.
Michael Shannon: We have to consider any type of archival and media storage how we're going to dispose of that.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: there's burning okay burning a lot of I don't I wouldn't say a lot but i've worked for companies that have a furnace.
Michael Shannon: When you go down to the basement and you have a furnace and you just throw it so stuff in there pumping is better than shredding.
Michael Shannon: Because, as we know, if you shred documents and you keep them bundled together that they can be you know you can you know reform them.
Michael Shannon: And it's true it's time consuming, but it can be done, I mean we see it in movies and TV shows all the time, but you know pumping and pulverizing paper records.
Michael Shannon: The more destruction, you can do the better obviously you want it to you want it to be rendered in some type of form that just can't be you know re compiled.
Michael Shannon: d causing cutting up DVDs.
Michael Shannon: democratizing magnet tapes you know.
Michael Shannon: I live in Texas.
Michael Shannon: So you know.
Michael Shannon: I would be lying to say there have not been times, where i've taken my hard drives or whatever out to the country.
Michael Shannon: And you know.
Michael Shannon: Practice my pistol okay so.
Michael Shannon: there's that there's that physical destruction, however, you do it Sledgehammer okay pulverizes.
Michael Shannon: So these are grant this is very kind of granular security plus stuff but.
Michael Shannon: data retention.
Michael Shannon: Well Giuseppe, let me say this here's how they're related.
Michael Shannon: You should only be retaining.
Michael Shannon: data that has that has that you've minimized.
Michael Shannon: Right so part of retention is, we would only retain data that's meaningful now if it's something that we have to maintain a read retain as for governance or regulations or for legal reasons, like like corporate tax records and those types of things.
Michael Shannon: But again, you should only be retaining the data that has been a result of your data minimization.
Michael Shannon: In other words, you don't want to archive and retaining a bunch of meaningless data.
Michael Shannon: Because there's a concept of of data.
Michael Shannon: Whenever we introduce mechanisms.
Michael Shannon: For.
Michael Shannon: obfuscation of our data or methods that are going to mask or make the data anonymous you following me, maybe because it's intellectual property or it's personal health whatever we use methods to obfuscate.
Michael Shannon: You know, we mask out certain numbers, whatever we do, we have to make sure that whatever methods we're using you the attacker cannot use what's called an inferior.
Michael Shannon: inference okay sorry about that inference, in other words, whatever you have not mast whatever you've not made anonymous whatever you not have these stated.
Michael Shannon: They the attacker can infer from what's left over information either that data itself or better data of that data.
Michael Shannon: So, even so, one of the other risks of storing.
Michael Shannon: or retaining data that really defies minimization it's not really necessary data it's not meaningful necessarily but but inference can be made from that raw data we don't want that to happen.
Michael Shannon: Okay, so so once we get through the process of knowing what we have that's really the first step of what we would call, generally speaking, risk management and risk assessment.
Michael Shannon: The first phase, as I said, like the insurance example I use you're going to get a home insurance policy, you have to know what you have and and have some type of value and along with that we have labeling tagging.
Michael Shannon: Classification sensitivity, all those wonderful things that we've spent the first 45 minutes talking about.
Michael Shannon: never talk about risk and, basically, that is why we are here.
Michael Shannon: That is, you know, one of our main goals, not necessarily to be you know in charge of the risk analysis and risk management that can involve a wide variety of parties, but we have a huge role to play in managing risk as security practitioners architects engineers administrators.
Michael Shannon: So where you are now.
Michael Shannon: Where you exist right now.
Michael Shannon: that's your inherent risk okay your baseline the natural level of risk that you have right now.
Michael Shannon: The current risk level.
Michael Shannon: Given what you have in place your existing technical controls your administrative and your physical controls.
Michael Shannon: that's inherent risk okay that's your status quo.
Michael Shannon: residual risk is what's left over after you introduce controls, now I if you if you look at this from the standpoint of like open, fair factor analysis of information risk what they would say is residual risk is what's left over.
Michael Shannon: after you have introduced and raised the level of difficulty or resistance through controls, but you've raised the level of difficulty or resistance to the threat actors and threat agents.
Michael Shannon: is how they would.
Michael Shannon: describe this.
Michael Shannon: Now here's the point is residual risk bad no.
Michael Shannon: As long as the residual risk is acceptable, based on your risk tolerance risk handling also referred to as your risk appetite, and this is not just one metric this is, you know, based on a wide variety of assets and asset classes and scenarios it's not a one size fits all.
Michael Shannon: And it's things like the risk ledger and risk register that needs to store.
Michael Shannon: The results of this analysis that tells us what is our residual risk, and it needs to be acceptable, based on how we treat her handle risk.
Michael Shannon: Now, on the exam you want to think about this from a security manager standpoint so what's going to come into play who's just going to come into play.
Michael Shannon: And i'm not memorizing these and getting a question on you know what is risk avoidance, let me give you an example.
Michael Shannon: let's let's look at a risk it's a risk acceptance, let me start there so you're going to accept or tolerate tolerate the level of risk you're deciding not to introduce a countermeasure control okay.
Michael Shannon: Well that's fine the definition is fine, but, but how does that really apply to us as security managers on this exam well here's how it applies if you or your team makes a decision that you're that a risk is acceptable.
Michael Shannon: You know the data that you store at the cloud in the different regions where it is or whatever you've decided to use for your disaster recovery site is acceptable you're going to have to most likely justify that decision to a steering committee or a security team or the C suite.
Michael Shannon: So, from a security management standpoint, the responsibility is it goes beyond just do we decide to accept it, based on qualitative and quantitative analysis it's.
Michael Shannon: We have to make sure that we're able to justify accepting the risk or avoiding the risk and justify the resources we're asking for to reduce or mitigate risk.
Michael Shannon: and to be able to justify the resources we asked for from the Steering Committee or the C suite or the CIS, or whoever.
Michael Shannon: Usually today a qualitative reporting is not going to be enough.
Michael Shannon: going in and saying I need $50,000 because i've got this list I made up of really bad things that can happen, and like i've got on a scale of one to 10, what are the worst.
Michael Shannon: Today, before a decision maker, is going to write the check or approve the budget, they would rather see something that's more quantitative.
Michael Shannon: Preferably.
Michael Shannon: So that's the way we think about this from the exam standpoint not memorizing the four ways to treat risk.
Michael Shannon: you're expected to know that, with a security plus certification or the SS CP now another decision from a management standpoint would be risks transference or sharing those kind of scenarios right so.
Michael Shannon: Using the cloud provider is a way to transfer share risk because there is a shared responsibility model.
Michael Shannon: And it depends on the type of service.
Michael Shannon: If its infrastructure as a service where i'm basically just using their data centers but i'm the one that decides to bring up whatever operating systems and applications and platforms.
Michael Shannon: i'm running the database on those operating systems well i'm assuming more risk in that scenario, if I decide to pay them for a relational database service like a fully managed my sequel service they're going to provide the underlying servers.
Michael Shannon: they'll do the updates to my sequel or Oracle or whatever if i'm paying them for that managed service they're going to assume more responsibility.
Michael Shannon: we'll talk more about that, when we get to cloud, but other examples are like you know, insurance and insurance policy is risk transference a cyber currency or not type of currency, a cyber security writer or a denim dear policy.
Michael Shannon: I talked yesterday about the possibility of having an agreement with another organization that's quite a few miles away in a metropolitan area and we're going to have a shared cold or warm site.
Michael Shannon: that's transference of risk which by the way, you probably have to justify that as well.
Michael Shannon: So remember we're going beyond just do I know the four types of risk treatment, we have to think about it from a security manager standpoint.
Michael Shannon: When assessing the vulnerability of your organization or your whatever the scope your department your business unit your floor your building whatever.
Michael Shannon: It all begins with how you define vulnerability.
Michael Shannon: And again, like I said vulnerability really shouldn't be like a laundry list of bad things that can happen.
Michael Shannon: You have to introduce.
Michael Shannon: The risk components to vulnerability, in other words magnitude and impact.
Michael Shannon: likelihood and probability.
Michael Shannon: And by the way over some type of timeframe, a quarter a fiscal year an annual year usually to define a risk and vulnerability, we need at least those three variables what's the magnitude or impact.
Michael Shannon: what's the probability or likelihood.
Michael Shannon: And then over a timeframe.
Michael Shannon: And then we can, if we if we need to we can start to break things down and decompose it.
Michael Shannon: To get more accurate metrics, which is something that fair factor analysis of information risk excels at.
Michael Shannon: So the more quantitative we can make this for our decision makers and the steering committee really the better off.
Michael Shannon: Okay there's been a number of books.
Michael Shannon: But it's pretty much been proven.
Michael Shannon: By people like Douglas hubbard.
Michael Shannon: who's written several books he's he's part of the open, fair.
Michael Shannon: But he's they pretty much proven the ineffectiveness of qualitative risk analysis.
Michael Shannon: that's what has been used traditionally now on this exam.
Michael Shannon: you're not you're not there to to.
Michael Shannon: To take a stand.
Michael Shannon: it's not going to be a matter of one is better than the other, we need to understand, both because qualitative still has a lot of value, especially the more macro the analysis.
Michael Shannon: If you're making large corporate governance decisions often all you can do is qualitative analysis.
Michael Shannon: So this is not an either or thing that they're going to ask you to you know, take a side.
Michael Shannon: But again before you can assess vulnerability, as this slide is saying you have to know what you have and know what your controls are, in other words, you have to know what your inherent risk is okay.
Michael Shannon: Another term that comes up as far as assessing vulnerability is you're looking for indicators of compromise now often we can look for these.
Michael Shannon: Through a wide variety of mechanisms, we can look at these two vulnerability look for these two vulnerability assessment tools we can look at look for these through threat hunting penetration testing.
Michael Shannon: Okay, but an indicator of compromise is a term you need to be able to define.
Michael Shannon: Because they represent.
Michael Shannon: Existing vulnerabilities and these indicators of compromise can be something that's been on a system for a long period of time.
Michael Shannon: Doing key logging or capturing a webcam or X will trading data.
Michael Shannon: or cyber currency mining crypto jacking.
Michael Shannon: And you don't you don't know it until the audit or the investigation or the penetration test.
Michael Shannon: So these are network or host based cyber observe cyber miserables.
Michael Shannon: That can be considered forensic artifacts things you would look for in a forensic investigation.
Michael Shannon: registry entries configuration files.
Michael Shannon: unknown files that you don't know the disposition of the file.
Michael Shannon: Something that has been compressed maybe a bunch of ar ar files in a deep in your directory structure.
Michael Shannon: encrypted files things that are in swap space or slack space on a drive resident in memory.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: information gathering is really the first phase of vulnerability assessment.
Michael Shannon: We have you know, the ability to get a wide variety of logs.
Michael Shannon: Traditional you know management V lands would have multiple servers that are collecting different logs you know your Microsoft servers that has the system application security logs firewalls generate logs ids devices ips devices.
Michael Shannon: You have SNP traps.
Michael Shannon: If you're using SNP version to see still, you have the vulnerability of using Community strings.
Michael Shannon: Preferably you're using SNP version three.
Michael Shannon: which gives you the same services as IP SEC.
Michael Shannon: You have net flow collectors.
Michael Shannon: version five is going to collect records that basically map to tcp UDP IP icmp headers but net flow version nine is eXtensible it's xml based so you can create your own custom tags and schema.
Michael Shannon: Often the various logs and traps and informs and output are being sent to a theme system security information and event management system.
Michael Shannon: combination of hardware and software.
Michael Shannon: could be cloud based.
Michael Shannon: You know.
Michael Shannon: Like I mentioned azure has Sentinel.
Michael Shannon: Next Generation we're going to talk about all these things so again vulnerability assessment involves tools right.
Michael Shannon: there's also vulnerability databases, you can take advantage of you can leverage right the national vulnerability database.
Michael Shannon: You can other sites vendors.
Michael Shannon: You know sands.org Cisco.
Michael Shannon: there's the common vulnerabilities and exposures, often in our CIS SP bootcamp i'll have people from miter.org it's not a it's not rare usually in each boot camp, I do, I have a handful of people that are from miter.
Michael Shannon: So you know the cbe an ID number description public references cross references used by the national vulnerability database that's missed.
Michael Shannon: The mist and vd and there's a scoring system and, often, for example, the scoring system, and these updates your in your security operations Center the tools that you're using are integrated.
Michael Shannon: So you're getting feeds you're getting updates okay.
Michael Shannon: So there's.
Michael Shannon: I the ISS exports database today, and these are not things to be specifically tested on but you should be familiar with them and if you're not, this is a gap analysis.
Michael Shannon: Go check it out and see what the what they what they providing.
Michael Shannon: and doing vulnerability scanning that is usually something that's part of a vulnerability tester assessment that is usually scheduled.
Michael Shannon: Okay, now, can you do a manual vulnerability scanning where you're maybe in real time tweaking some type of script or maybe you're in real time writing Python.
Michael Shannon: That might be more part of a penetration test technically a vulnerability scanning process is something that's scheduled using like burp suite burp suite or oh wasps zap.
Michael Shannon: automated tools that are looking for vulnerabilities on websites and web applications.
Michael Shannon: vulnerabilities that cross site scripting and different variants there's like three or four variants of cross site scripting request forgery which compromises authenticated sessions.
Michael Shannon: If you're using sequel as your back end database to the web service or you're using some database that accepts structured query language.
Michael Shannon: there's different types of injection attacks sequel injection l dap injection so vulnerability scanning tools vulnerability scanning usually something that's more scheduled.
Michael Shannon: We always have to be cognizant of the fact that we have privileged insiders that may be involved in the dark web, so the dark web is an issue for us.
Michael Shannon: From the standpoint of do we have privileged insiders who are using the dark dark web or at a cloud provider.
Michael Shannon: there's exit nodes they may be, attacking our cloud resources, a dark web is also called an overlay network or or dark net it's called bad because it's not indexed by the.
Michael Shannon: World Wide Web search engines.
Michael Shannon: We often think of the dark web is kind of like a James Bond movie right where there's some island out in the Pacific, where some bad evil person has really powerful computers well.
Michael Shannon: that's not what the dark web is.
Michael Shannon: But you need special software and browsers it's it's you know it's highly distributed with peer to peer file sharing, so you can use TOR or freenet or riffle.
Michael Shannon: to access the dark web, why is this something to be cognizant of from a vulnerability standpoint well there's a lot of bad stuff there.
Michael Shannon: And if you're going to be involved in forensics.
Michael Shannon: forensic you know cyber forensics if that's what you're doing now, then you know what i'm talking you'll know what i'm talking about, but if moving forward you're going to get more involved in cyber forensics over half of your activities will be involving child pornography.
Michael Shannon: it's just a sad sad truth.
Michael Shannon: And that is can be regularly found on the dark Web.
Michael Shannon: And you're not necessarily forensic investigating because you have an employee.
Michael Shannon: And it may be the case where they're engaged in that, but often that is used as a payload to get on the system of somebody in the C suite of the C team or a whale.
Michael Shannon: And then to extort them.
Michael Shannon: And because you know, the better the the the bigger their reputation.
Michael Shannon: You know in society in their religious affiliation, the more likely they are to pay off an extortion, or a ransom.
Michael Shannon: Another thing about the dark web is that it has malware as a service.
Michael Shannon: Which is a cottage industry, you know a lot of people who can't find a job will just now go into the dark web and scrape up some money and pay for a ransomware campaign.
Michael Shannon: And then the malware as a service entity will run the campaign will will even do like customer service to help that target go get my narrow or whatever to pay off the ransom.
Michael Shannon: Often, when you're doing it, for example, a penetration test or a vulnerability assessment.
Michael Shannon: If somebody is running a campaign against your organization often they will use Open Source intelligence sources.
Michael Shannon: or tools there's tools, you can get an exploit kits like melty go that are graphical representations.
Michael Shannon: And it's similar to that to the goal of like a graph database that I mentioned that uses nodes to create relationships you're doing the same type of thing about an entity with these tools scraping everything you can find.
Michael Shannon: And this is used for reconnaissance information gathering the early phases of an advanced persistent threat or a campaign against your organization or as we'll see when we're doing some someone's doing a penetration test.
Michael Shannon: we've hired some firm to do pen testing and we're going to pay them extra to do a black box, where they don't know anything about us.
Michael Shannon: it's going to be more costly but they're going to spend time using open source intelligence tools and other threat intelligence sources in the early reconnaissance phase and information gathering.
Michael Shannon: This is these sources are kind of US centric.
Michael Shannon: Because they involve the cyber security and infrastructure security agency also mitre that we talked about, and this these.
Michael Shannon: types of sources really started to come together at like 20 years ago okay after 911 right, so there was there was lessons learned and one of the lessons that was learned was that.
Michael Shannon: that the Federal agencies.
Michael Shannon: Okay, regardless of what their role or role is or was were very siloed and there was just not enough cooperation and communication inter agency.
Michael Shannon: Okay, where this law enforcement, whether it's intelligence, whatever, and so one of the things that emerged from that is having exchange of real time information and metadata that can be used by multiple entities.
Michael Shannon: So that became a huge initiative right so automated indicator sharing is that type of database with a wide variety of participants, public and private sector sticks is a language that was created by mitre a standardized language with structured information about cyber threats OK.
Michael Shannon: And then taxi is the transport mechanism that's easy to remember Okay, because a taxi right http https based primarily and then you have other types of tools that use machine learning predictive analysis, you know predictive analysis.
Michael Shannon: That is.
Michael Shannon: sounds futuristic but the concepts behind the movie minority report which i'm sure some of you have seen, but even if you haven't.
Michael Shannon: Remember, for those who've seen in if you haven't seen it it's built around a future time where possibly using graph databases, you will predict, who is more likely to commit crimes pre crime that's not that's not a science fiction anymore.
Michael Shannon: it's happening predictive analysis artificial intelligence involved in these processes.
Michael Shannon: So you have to document all this right and again we talked about one of the main areas we use is what's called a a risk ledger or a risk register a risk log could be you know spreadsheets spreadsheets and databases, but you've got to have something.
Michael Shannon: This is nice, this is from this is from a ready.gov so you know.
Michael Shannon: Identifying your hazards and again what part of your job is understanding.
Michael Shannon: The probability and likelihood now again, you can you can approach the hazards saying you know, on a scale of one to 10 will have a fire on a scale of one to 10 will have a mechanical breakdown, but usually we want to shoot for something more quiet.
Michael Shannon: And something that you didn't think was a you know, a clear and present danger.
Michael Shannon: Suddenly, out of nowhere, it becomes a clear and present danger, I mean there was a lot of organizations many across the planet that were not ready for the impact of that.
Michael Shannon: Right.
Michael Shannon: Now, maybe we weren't surprised.
Michael Shannon: But we were surprised by the reaction.
Michael Shannon: by governments.
Michael Shannon: So obviously you have to have some flexibility built in, but understanding the potential possible hazards and you know once things happen.
Michael Shannon: and your organization goes through that well that that's obviously going to change your risk management.
Michael Shannon: You know more and more organizations will be prepared.
Michael Shannon: And then the assets definitely have to know that, and at the top of the list for many organizations, people are the most valuable asset but that's not always the case.
Michael Shannon: In some organizations, it may be the facility, the equipment, the data.
Michael Shannon: Okay, our corporate secrets are formulas and then analyzing the impact okay magnitude so.
Michael Shannon: some type of.
Michael Shannon: ledger's and.
Michael Shannon: A combination of ledger's and matrices This is one that comes from a guy at Intel.
Michael Shannon: And really you know, being aware of kind of these different types of events, I remember a negative event is an incident.
Michael Shannon: Can I kind of be generally aware of those is is good, you know it's common sense that's good to know know, knowing that you can have non hostile actors and hostile actors, but the big takeaway here is, you know who checks off all the boxes, according to this security analyst at Intel.
Michael Shannon: But like I said I don't like this word.
Michael Shannon: I like compromised.
Michael Shannon: compromised insider who may be disgruntled but we talked about that yesterday checks off all the boxes.
Michael Shannon: All right, we're doing good.
Michael Shannon: Even though I can't move my slides forward so.
Michael Shannon: I want to take my break now because I don't want to I don't want to talk for five minutes and then take a break, this is a whole.
Michael Shannon: we're into a new topic here okay so we're going to come back and we're going to talk about and compare qualitative semi Croissant.
Michael Shannon: And quantitative analysis Okay, and then give you some places to run with if you need to do some gap analysis here okay so let's go and take our first break now and i'll see you back here i'm going to stop the recording.
Michael Shannon: We don't want that, on the playback.